EpiCUM (Epigraphs of Castello Ursino Museum) is a software project that aims at valorising the 574 epigraphs kept in the Castello Ursino Museum of Catania, in order to make them usable by different kinds of users. The project is a good example of wise interdisciplinary collaboration between different entities with different institutional purposes, in particular the Civic Museum Castello Ursino, the Institute of Science and Technology of Cognition of the CNR, the Arts High School Lazzaro, the University of Catania and the project I.Sicily. 
The EpiCUM’s activities included the reconnaissance and autopsy of the epigraphic items, the digitization of information mainly gathered from the edition of Kalle Korhonen (Le iscrizioni del Museo Civico di Catania: Storia delle collezioni – Cultura epigrafica – Edizione. Societas Scientiarum Fennica: Commentationes humanarum litterarum, vol. 121, Helsinki 2004), the setting up of a strongly educational and highly inclusive exhibition - Voci di Pietra (Voices of Stone)- realized through innovative ways, the organization of an international scientific conference. EpiCUM, the various phases of the project, the partners, the editorial choices, and the encoding standards are conveyed through http://epicum.istc.cnr.it. 
The web platform presents the digital edition of the 574 inscriptions (genuine inscriptions, epigraphic forgeries, and copies, of various origins, languages, type). Each of the 574 epigraphic records presents info about the document, images, transcription of the text, Italian translation, transcription in the standard EpiDoc TEI XML v. 9.3. All the epigraphic information has been organized in interoperable open formats and models both according to the EpiDoc schema (in XML and JSON), and in RDF/OWL ontologies based on the CIDOC-CRM model. Moreover, the web platform allows to explore epigraphic information through different specialized tools: symbols, onomastics, prosopographical data, advanced search, a reproduction of the multimedia kiosk located within the Museum. EpiCUM is open source and open access.
